docs: added examples to address various generative AI application scenarios by using gateway api inference extension (#812)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension: site-src/guides/use-cases.md

# Common Use Cases

> ??? example "Experimental"

Reviewer: remove this?

Author: done

    This project is still in an alpha state and breaking changes may occur in the future.

This section provides examples to address various generative AI application scenarios by using Gateway API Inference Extension.

## Example 1: Serve multiple generative AI models
A company wants to deploy multiple large language models (LLMs) to serve different workloads. 
For example, they might want to deploy a Gemma3 model for a chatbot interface and a Deepseek model for a recommendation application. 
The company needs to ensure optimal serving performance for these LLMs.
Using Gateway API Inference Extension, you can deploy these LLMs on your cluster with your chosen accelerator configuration in an `InferencePool`. 

> You can then route requests based on the model name (such as chatbot and recommender) and the `Criticality` property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can then route requests based on the model name (such as "chatbot" and "recommender") and the `Criticality` property.
```

Author: done

The following diagram illustrates how Gateway API Inference Extension routes requests to different models based on the model name.
![Serving multiple generative AI models](../images/serve-mul-gen-AI-models.png)

> This example illustrates a conceptual example regarding how you can use the `HTTPRoute` object to route based on model name like “chatbot” or “recommender” to `InferencePool`.

Reviewer 3: s/regarding how you can/of how to/

Author: done

> ```shell

Reviewer 3: s/shell/yaml/

apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: routes-to-llms
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: inference-gateway
  rules:
  - matches:
    - headers:
      - type: Exact

>         name: X-Gateway-Model-Name

Reviewer 3: Additional context should be provided, e.g. [BBR](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/blob/main/pkg/bbr/README.md) is being used to copy the model name from the request body to the header.

Author: done

        value: chatbot
      path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /
    backendRefs:
    - name: gemma3
      kind: InferencePool
  - matches:
    - headers:
      - type: Exact

>         name: X-Gateway-Model-Name

Reviewer 3: Additional context should be provided, e.g. [BBR](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/blob/main/pkg/bbr/README.md) is being used to copy the model name from the request body to the header.

Author: done

        value: recommender
      path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /
    backendRefs:
    - name: deepseek-r1
      kind: InferencePool

>       

Reviewer 3: Remove additional blank line.

Author: done

```

## Example 2:   Serve LoRA adapters on a shared accelerator
A company wants to serve LLMs for document analysis and focuses on audiences in multiple languages, such as English and Spanish. 

> They have fine-tuned models for each language, but need to efficiently use their GPU and TPU capacity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They have fine-tuned LoRA adapters for each language, but need to efficiently use their GPU and TPU capacity. 
```

Reviewer 3: s/They have fine-tuned LoRA adapters/They have a fine-tuned LoRA adapter/

Author: done

You can use Gateway API Inference Extension to deploy dynamic LoRA fine-tuned adapters for each language (for example, `english-bot` and `spanish-bot`) on a common base model and accelerator. 

> This lets you reduce the number of required accelerators by densely packing multiple models on a common accelerator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This lets you reduce the number of required accelerators by densely packing multiple models in a shared pool.
```

this is a nit, and perhaps not even an improvement, just suggesting a wording change, that sounds more correct to me. LMKWYT, it may be less useful to newcomers however.

Author: done

> The following diagram illustrates how Gateway API Inference Extension serves multiple LoRA adapters on a shared accelerator.

Reviewer 2: Same nit, we should change `accelerator` to `pool` here, since this could be many accelerators (and technically you could use CPUs for inference, and that would still be a valid pool... even though it would be painfully slow)

Author: done

![Serving LoRA adapters on a shared accelerator](../images/serve-LoRA-adapters.png)

> This example illustrates a conceptual example regarding how you can densely serve multiple LoRA adapters with distinct workload performance objectives on a common InferencePool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example illustrates how you can densely serve multiple LoRA adapters with distinct workload performance objectives on a common InferencePool.
```

Author: done

> Assuming we have created container pods with our base model and model server named “gemma2b-vllm”. We instantiate an `InferencePool` resource to logically represent all the container pods that are running this base model across all the nodes in our Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: Suggest removing this. Some terms are a bit confusing, e.g,, `across all the nodes`.

We should assume users already read the get started guide and know the concepts of the pool, so no need to explain how to create a pool. just an example is sufficient.

Author: done

```shell
apiVersion: gateway.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: InferencePool
metadata:
  name: gemma3

>   modelServerSelector:

Reviewer: I think this is `selector` instead of `modelServerSelector`

Author: done

  - pool: gemma3

```
Let us say we have a couple of LoRA adapters named “english-bot” and “spanish-bot” for the Gemma3 base model. 
You can create an `InferenceModel` resource and associate these LoRA adapters to the relevant InferencePool resource.  
In this case, we associate these LoRA adapters to the “gemma3 InferencePool resource created above.

```shell
apiVersion: inference.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: InferenceModel
metadata:
  name: english-bot
spec:

>   modelName: google/gemma-3-4b-it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  modelName: english-bot
```

  criticality: Standard
  poolRef:
    name: gemma3
        
---
apiVersion: inference.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: InferenceModel
metadata:
  name: spanish-bot
spec:

>   modelName: google/gemma-3-4b-it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  modelName: spanish-bot
```

  criticality: Critical
  poolRef:
    name: gemma3
    
```
Now, you can route your requests from the gateway using the `HTTPRoute` object.
```shell
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: inference-gateway
spec:
  listeners:
  - protocol: HTTP
    port: 80
    name: http

---
kind: HTTPRoute
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
  name: routes-to-llms
spec:
  parentRefs:
    - name: inference-gateway
  rules:
  - matches:
      path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /
    backendRefs:
    - name: gemma3
      kind: InferencePool

> ```

Reviewer: In the last, add two curl commands to demonstrate clients can now make requests to 2 different adapters, e.g.,

```
curl -i ${IP}:${PORT}/v1/completions -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '{
"model": "english-bot",
"prompt": "What's the color of the sky",
"max_tokens": 100,
"temperature": 0
}'
```

Reviewer 3: Do the same for example 1, e.g.:
```sh
curl -i ${IP}:${PORT}/v1/completions -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -H 'X-Gateway-Model-Name: chatbot' -d '{ "model": "chatbot", "prompt": "What's the color of the sky", "max_tokens": 100, "temperature": 0 }'
```

Author: done
